And tell me a little bit, quite easily, I mean, is this a reflective kind of a book?
Tell me what brought you into this reflection.
I think that you see your life totally differently when you reach the point where you know that you're going to die.
And I think that's the shift that happens in midlife.
And you suddenly see your parents as human beings.
You don't see them as obstacles to be overcome.
And I'm very lucky in that my parents are both still alive and we've come through a transition in our relationship.
I got very interested in my roots the way a lot of people do around the age of 50.
And I began interviewing my parents.
I would never have wanted to do that when I was younger.
And I wanted to know how I got to be who I was.
I wanted to see my parents as they were when they first fell in love.
Not when they were parents, you know, with the capital P.
and uh it was part of my coming to terms with my own life and it was so the impulse to do this the autobiographical impulse was so strong as i approached my 50th birthday that i put aside another book i was writing in order to write this book it was a book that absolutely had to be written also the other the thing that interested me very much was it seemed to me that my generation of women and also of men had gone through
enormous shifts in what it meant to be a woman, what it meant to be a man, what it meant to be a father, what it meant to be a mother.
We were raised for one world, and we found ourselves negotiating another, in a sense.
We were raised to have stay-at-home mothers and fathers who were breadwinners.
And we discovered, because of the economy, because we didn't have the fat economy of our parents post-World War II generation, that we both had to go out and be breadwinners.
that we couldn't afford that social arrangement that they had taken for granted.
It wasn't so much feminism that changed our lives, but the economy, in a way.
And we had to figure out new ways of rearing children.
And so it seemed to me that a whole generation had seen all the constants with which they were raised turn into something different as they grew up, and then found themselves raising children
in an age that could not even have been contemplated or anticipated when they were little.
And that seemed to me something interesting to write about.
I mean, it seemed to me that I had spent my entire adult life feeling somehow in the wrong.
I didn't raise my child right because I went out and worked.
I didn't do this right.
And then I discovered that every other woman I knew felt eternally in the wrong and had gone through the same passages.
So that seemed an interesting thing.
to chronicle these fantastic shifts in perspective.
And as I got into it, I learned amazing things about myself.
I learned what was important about my parents, the way my parents raised me, and why they made it possible for me to be a writer.
Whatever neurotic things they did, the one thing that was constant was that they always encouraged the imagination.
And I was never punished for my imaginary friends.
for example.
I was always, the imagination was something good.
It was something positive.
It was not silly.
It was not, oh, don't say that.
So it was very interesting for me.
I mean, having written this book, I feel totally emptied out.
Can't imagine what I'm going to do next.
Well, was it a working out for you, or did you pretty much know where you expressed it?
I did not know where I was going to go with it.
I started out with the notion that
We were the whiplash generation, and that I was as typical, although untypical, as anyone could be, in the sense that I felt that I had been swayed by all these great social changes.
And as I wrote it, I discovered all kinds of things I never could have predicted.
I didn't think that a big part of it would be understanding what it meant to be a secular Jew.
A friend of mine had asked me, a friend who lives up in Middlebury and was editing the New England Review, had asked me to write an article about being Jewish.
Being Jewish, and for special issues of the New England Review.
And as I began to write about that, I saw that there was a whole autobiography in that.
So many different things came into it, but it was absolutely a book I had to write.
I wrote it with great passion.
And the original draft had far too much statistics in it.
I had also done a kind of Gayle Sheehy-esque thing of who is the typical American woman, what does the Census Bureau say, and when I came to the end of the manuscript, which was about 700 pages,
I cut all that stuff out of the book and left the personal stuff.
How long was this manuscript, just out of curiosity?
When I, um, it was about five, six hundred, no, it was about six, but the original manuscript was about seven, and I cut it stringently by a hundred pages because I made the decision that the personal stuff was the lasting stuff, that all the Census Bureau, you know, where are women now, how many work outside the home,
that that was something other people could do better than me.
And that can be found elsewhere.
Yeah, Gail Sheehy does it better, Naomi Wolf does it better.
That was not my main case.
This is really not what you're writing about in any case.
No, it's an autobiography of a writer, really.
I like the subtitle, a midlife memoir.
In the Navy, you talk about flying an airplane, you make these big course corrections.
You figure out where you are, and maybe you have to...
Do you feel that you're making any... I mean, you talk about this is the second half of your life.
How am I going to live it differently?
Is it going to be different?
Do you come to any conclusions personally in that regard?
I think that... It's a midlife memoir.
It's a reflection.
But is it also... Do you project anything at the same time, I wonder?
What I project is I take responsibility to a much larger extent than I ever did before for my own life.
And I'm not looking for solutions outside myself.
I don't believe that if I fall madly in love with some passing stranger, it's going to change my life.
I don't think my life will be a lot different if this book is a bestseller or if it's not a bestseller.
I have my vocation, really, and I know what I do.
And it's within myself to find what's right or wrong for me.
The external stuff matters far less.
And that's not the way I felt when I was younger.
I was obsessed with success, obsessed with falling in love with the right person.
Now I know there's a person I have to fall in love with with this person here.
There's a kind of calm and a serenity.
And if I don't feel it all the time, it's a goal that I have.
Would there be a fear of 50?
I don't mean just the title, but I mean this reflection.
of these anxieties if there hadn't been a fear of flying?
I mean, this is the 16th book, I guess?
Yes.
I mean, but that's the one, of course, that if you say Erika John is a fear of flying.
Has that been a burden for you?
Oh, terrible burden.
I mean, and is that burden somehow responsible for your having to do this?
No, all my titles are very tongue-in-cheek.
I mean, I think that's, except, yeah, except Saranissima, let's say, but
My chapter titles are tongue-in-cheek, and my titles are tongue-in-cheek.
I never really thought that I was looking for the audience that read Fear of Flying or anything like that.
I thought it was funny.
Actually, this book is quite different from Fear of Flying.
It's an autobiography.
Fear of Flying is a novel.
My point is there wouldn't be a Fear of Fifty, regardless of what you want to call it.
Right.
if this other book hadn't had such a profound influence.
Exactly.
Or impact, I guess, not influence, but impact in your life.
And one of the questions is, when you get those answered prayers, how do you live out the rest of your life?
We all want, we all think we want great fame.
We all think we want money and to be sent to Hollywood.
But when it really happens, what actually happens to a person
who's pretty sensitive and aware and scholarly, who goes through that experience.
It's not at all what you expect.
And it proves to be something that you have to live through.
And it proves to be a test, really.
Another test of grace.
And it proves to be extremely humbling.
If you had the scenario to be played out differently,
Would you have preferred the fear of flying not be the overwhelming success that it was?
I can't imagine my life hadn't been different.
I mean, these are the opportunities I was given.
I mean, we're all given a set of circumstances to make of what we will.
And those were mine.
For a long time, I didn't know what to do with it.
The truth of the matter is that many writers who write books of the sort that fear of flying became never write again.
or never write for publication.
Their lives explode or implode in various ways.
I mean, you think of Salinger with Catcher in the Rye.
Only wrote short stories.
Fragmentary works after that.
The exposure is so great that it almost makes you self-conscious.
She only wrote that one book.
Remember?
That's one book.
You never saw anything from her again.
The guy who wrote Raintree County, Lockridge, one book.
And he killed himself, didn't he?
I think.
I was just... Broad again.
Yeah.
Biography by his son, somehow.
Really?
Yeah.
It's very hard to survive that kind of fame when you become the spokesperson for a generation.
Especially so early in your career.
I mean, it wasn't your first book, but...
You know, look at Catch-22, do the Joe Heller.
I mean, he has to carry that poor thing.
It's a big burden to carry.
It really is.
It's almost as if, I mean, people speak to me about fear of flying the way they speak about the Kennedy assassination.
I remember where I was when I read that book.
My question goes back to what you said earlier, somebody who's scholarly and literary.
My first recollection of Erika Jung is not fear of flying.
But sitting in an audience here in Boston where you spoke, it was a Boston Herald luncheon.
It's got to be, you know, 79 or 80 or something like that.
And you get up and you spoke about poetry and the power of imagery.
And I was sitting with this editor from Little Brown, and we both said, jeez, that was really, you know, you didn't talk anything about, you know, flying or the,
I don't even remember what your book was at the time.
I mean, it was irrelevant to lunches.
Do you remember this?
It was a poetry book.
It was a book and author luncheon for the Boston Herald.
It was terrific.
It was really good.
Thank you.
It was nice.
I remember it.
And then my wife drove me in today, and I'm going over, and I said, I read a couple of your poems in here.
I said, she says, I wouldn't have known about the poetry.
And I said, no, I mean, there were many, many sides to the writer.
And I guess that's kind of a shame, isn't it, that these,
These layers, I guess, these textures of you are perhaps lost to so many of the people with 12 and a half million, or millions upon millions of readers, with 12.5 million copies of the book.
Does that disturb you in some way?
Oh, it's always disturbed me, but, you know, I make my peace with it.
I mean, when you have a book that's a phenom, that has to happen.
But who gets to choose what they get famous for?
You can describe the scene in San Francisco after you had your daughter and you're reading this poem, and they're hissing you.
Now, that must have been pretty... That was what it meant to be on the firing line of the women's movement in the last 20 years.
You betrayed them.
You were a traitor.
Because of writing about childbirth, because there was a whole generation of women for whom feminism meant throw out whatever their mothers had done.
I understand that now.
I didn't then.
And maybe they thought I was plumping for compulsory.
Maybe you understand it.
You understand what... I understand what their reaction was.
They had seen me as the person who was the heroine of throw away the old reserve, throw away staying at home in the suburbs and raising a child.
I had become a symbol to them.
They didn't really know who I was or what I really represented or what kind of feminist I was.
But the book had become a symbol...
of breaking chains, you know, breaking out.
And when I read poems about childbirth, they felt that I had recanted.
I hadn't recanted.
I was the same person with different facets to me, and I didn't believe that women should take a back seat in power just because they had babies.
But they made an assumption based on my public image, which wasn't even who I was.
So there was a lot of that kind of buffeting, which is maybe interesting to write about.
The movement has changed.
And I think we're going to see, in the next decade, we're going to see a much more pragmatic side to the women's movement.
We're going to learn to build alliances.
We're going to join hands.
Different kinds of feminists are going to join hands.
And there's going to be less of that because we're really going to enter the political process.
And in order to do that, we have to build alliances.
We can't have these stupid emotional reactions, you know.
As a father of two young daughters, I'm very happy.
How old are your daughters?
My older daughter is 13 and the younger is 11.
I took them both for a ride to New York on a day trip down and back.
Just go to bookstores and walk around.
Great.
Are you familiar with this book?
And I haven't read it, but I'm familiar with it.
The Who Stole Feminism book that's been making... I've read it, yeah.
Any reaction to that or response?
I mean, is that germane in any of the things that you're saying about feminists actually becoming more of a... Well, the book raises very interesting questions, and it's been summarily dismissed out of hand by a lot of feminists.
I mean, I've seen Ellie Smeal debating...
Christina Hoff Summers on television.
Summers raises some interesting questions about doctrinaire feminism and what it's become in the academic world.
And I think those questions should be heard.
She teaches a clerk, by the way.
Does she?
Although I'm writing out for a dozen newspapers, I should tell you that when I'm done.
I mean, this won't just be in Worcester.
Oh, how great.
So you have a little syndicate.
Yeah, a couple million.
A combined circulation is about a million and a half.
That's so wonderful.
You should get Parade.
They need a book on.
I mean, 200 words.
I mean, how can you say anything?
That's true.
Four paragraphs.
I really like to develop a nice long, I mean, I can write 3,000 words if it can be.
You know, that's never been my problem.
I don't want to leave this.
You had a quote in there towards the end.
This book is written on, every book I have written has been written on the bleeding corpse of my grandmother.
Could you just explain that sentence to me, that statement?
My grandmother really believed that women should wear white kid gloves and that we should have duvet covers that were freshly pressed and made out of linens.
And her whole life was absorbed in that, and she was a very bright woman.
But I think of the way I would like to live and don't.
I don't have linen sheets.
I can't even get a housekeeper with iron linen sheets.
So I think that women's lives, I mean, as we've sort of branched out and done other things, our lives, those things have suffered.
And I'm always aware of them.
I'm always aware of the beautiful things that make a home run that women can't do anymore.
We don't have time to do anymore.
But I regret them.
Who do you write the book for?
Is this written for a new generation of women, or is it written for... I think somebody wants you.
Is that supposed to be speaking like that?
Okay.
I guess I was wondering what you would like to read.
First of all, did you ever have a reader in mind, who your reader is?
I never really know who my reader is.
I mean, I'm always surprised by who my reader is.
The Henry Miller book, for example, had a very young audience.
That was very interesting.
That is interesting.
I would have thought a more solid kind of an audience.
The people who came into the stores were kids in their 20s who wanted to be writers and go to Paris and follow in Henry.
I mean, there was a much younger audience.
You never really know when you write a book.
And I write the book I have to write.
I write what is the next book in my head.
I think that this book will be read by many of the people who clutched Fear of Flying as a Bible because it recounts
so much of the life that we have all shared i think that i think men identify with the book as well it doesn't deal only with women's issues and the changes that have happened in our lives over the last 20 years have also happened to men inevitably the family has changed tremendously so that i don't know exactly who the ideal reader is initially it will be women like me women of what i call the whiplash generation um
But I think it will have a very big audience.
I think it will have an audience also of men of my generation and then of younger women who are looking for how to make work and children go together.
Describe, you do in the book, of course, and even kind of trademark patent pending on a whiplash.
But tell me a little bit about that and what you mean by that.
I'm thinking of the women who were raised
in the era of um doris day when doris day was the ego ideal of every young girl and then who came into their 20s wanting to be gloria steiner and then who raised their children in the age of madonna and who saw all the ideals of womanhood change back and forth on the shortest possible cycle like this like spectators at a tennis game and that's what i mean by whiplash i mean
If we had grown up to be the women we were supposed to be, we would have been bad ladies.
We would never have been able to make a living.
We would have been thrown out of marriages and broke.
So in other words, we had to change all the things that we intended to do, planned to do, as we went along, as the culture changed.
Do you remember the movie Alfie, What's It All About?
I mean, is this the kind of thing you ask yourself when you're writing a book like this?
What's it all about?
Or do you pretty much know what it's all about?
And I guess in terms of your life, not just your own life and how it went and what it means.
I always question what does my life mean?
You know, am I doing meaningful work?
Where am I going?
What am I going to do next?
What does one live for?
What are the worthwhile things to live for?
To have work you love, to have people you love in your life.
But what are we here for?
We're a very strange species that's been bred upon this planet, and often a very self-destructive species.
And you can't help but wonder those things as you're writing it.
But my task, really, in writing this book was to get it right
to get the story.
I wanted to write the story of the last 50 years and what they've meant in the lives of women, but I could only tell it through my story.
Your passage.
And I believe that if you get it right through one woman's story, you get it right.
And I do believe that autobiography is a liberating act.
I mean, if you think of the autobiography's
that have been written, for example, by African-American writers, Maya Angelou, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, or James Baldwin's autobiographical writing, those books are radical acts, not because they speak about every member of that population, but because of, through writing about one person's story, they show a whole pattern in a society.
And those autobiographies have been liberating books.
I think we live in a great age of autobiography.
You mentioned going back when your aspirations were for ambition and success, all these things that we all have.
But did you have, did you mindfully like your flying thought that it would be this overwhelming... I mean, nobody... Nobody could, no.
But did you know that it would be a commercial book, at least?
No.
Not at all.
I never thought...
Because this is the anniversary coming up, isn't it?
So why don't I talk a little bit about that, if you don't mind?
Do you have a line?
Yeah, just a reflection on that, because it does fit into the reflection, I think.
I never thought it was a commercial book when I was writing it.
I thought it was a book about a young woman who wanted to be a poet and her adventure, her odyssey.
What I wanted to put into that book was all the things in a woman's head that had not been put on paper before.
The fantasies about men, the dreams of greatness and grandeur, the sexual thoughts that are forbidden to speak about, much less write about, all those things.
I wanted the book to be as full of a real woman's thoughts.
as any book had ever been.
I didn't, I hadn't found that in other women's novels.
I mean, were there any anxieties?
You were a young woman, or a young woman at the time?
I was terrified.
I mean, because you could really ruin a career this way, too, don't you think?
I mean, there must have been the thought that I could really be, I mean, look what happened before.
It didn't want Philip Loth, or any little important I used to play, but it certainly did.
For many years,
really heard him tremendously didn't it i'm not asking your comment on that but i'm just trying to draw a comparison i was very i mean i was very aware that there was a price for telling the truth but that if you're going to write books you must tell the truth what are you offering your readers if you don't tell the truth i mean there is there is certain entertainment reading that you pass the time with
And some of it is very good and written on a high level, and some of it is trash.
And I think that has its function.
You know, something to read on the airplane and stuff.
But a real writer tries to tell the truth and tries to make people look at their lives in a different way than they did before.
That seems to me to be what writers do.
It's a kind of sacred trust.
You do absolutely the best you can.
And it seems to me that though there's a high price for telling the truth,
It's that that you sign on for when you become a writer.
Were you surprised by the response to the book?
Enormously surprised.
I didn't expect.
And it did, of course, change your life dramatically.
It changed my life.
I left the academic world, which I was sort of edging out of anyway, and I became a full-time professional writer.
which is also an enormous burden, as you know, because you have to.
Making a living writing books in an age when television is the dominant medium, not books, can be a very up-and-down life.
It's certainly not an easy life in the age when publishers get fired and shuffled around.
It's a hard way.
You make a point in here, which anyone who's ever tried to wait for a living can
I mean, anybody who thinks you do this to make money is crazy.
I mean, you can never be repaid.
I can never be repaid for the amount of time, effort.
Even correcting the proof.
Because he's gone into this.
Whatever you make is not enough, is my feeling on it.
I mean, it's irrelevant.
You don't think about it while you're doing it.
My brother's an attorney.
You know, the media goes on when you're talking.
You know what I'm saying?
And he asked me,
I don't want to know, but I wouldn't begin to calculate it.
About two cents an hour is about where you make it.
You know, when you decide to become a professional writer, you're not doing this for the big bucks.
No.
There's something that's driving you to do it and to ease away from the cocoon of academia, I'm sure.
Partly that, but also because
what had moved me most as a child were books i mean i loved books and books had had tremendous power i thought um the power to make me go to a different place feel i was somewhere else it just seemed to me to be what i wanted to do because writers and books were very important to me nobody does it for money of course there are some few maybe less than 20 entertainer writers
who make $50 million a year.
But that's not the kind of writer I am.
I mean, they're writers who really specifically do write to entertain, and I think some of them do it very well.
But I'm not that kind of writer.
I write what I have to write, and I hope that by exposing my heart, I help other people deal with their own lives in a different way.
Is the best for you a hit, do you think?
I'm going to write very different kinds of books, I think.
I hope I will.
I had started, when this book started to come, I had started a novel set in the future.
It's a kind of Brave New World novel.
And I'm going to go back and see what's happened to that book while I was working on this.
This is the one you were working on?
Mm-hmm.
When this book started to come.
And I have a bunch of other ideas in my notebook.
I always do.
And it will be a novel that I know.
But I don't know exactly where it's going yet.
Now, what prompted you to do the Miller book, for instance?
That's just a lot of... That's not in the sequence, really, is it?
Or is it?
It was an interesting book for me.
It was really... I got pushed into doing it by Joni Evans, who said, you have to write about Henry.
You're the only person who really understands Henry.
You have to write about Henry.
And actually it was a very interesting experience for me writing that book about Henry Miller.
I realized I never want to write a biography, a true biography.
And I learned a lot about his life and about writers' lives.
And that book has had its own impact.
You know, it was a bit of a disaster because my publisher got fired the day it was published.
For reasons that had nothing to do with the book.
But it was, it sold out its first printing of 25,000 copies and then they wouldn't re-print it.
They wouldn't reprint it.
Can't you have a lawsuit on that?
Even though I have a free lawyer, even though my husband is a lawyer, I would not.
I think it would be very hard, too.
People say, why don't you sue them?
I said, for what?
To get the rest of my advance, which was small to begin with, and to make myself a pariah in the business?
Did they want you to pay back his ass?
If they asked for it, they're not going to get it.
I'd love for them to ask for it.
Then I might sue.
No, I kept it.
I kept it.
They've not asked for it.
Let me breach the contract.
Publishers do that more and more, you know.
Totally breached it.
I mean, I've got a letter.